Copilot instructions for Kokkos-kernels (#3068)
kokkos/kokkos-kernels: .github/copilot-instructions.md

# Copilot cloud agent instructions for `kokkos/kokkos-kernels`

## Project overview
- KokkosKernels implements local computational kernels for linear algebra (BLAS and LAPACK) and graph operations using the Kokkos shared-memory parallel programming model.
- The project supports CUDA, HIP, SYCL, OpenMP, Threads, and Serial backends (availability depends on how Kokkos is configured).
- For cloud-agent work, use a modern toolchain targeting C++20 and CMake 3.22+.
- Primary development branch is `develop` (not `main`).

## Build instructions
This repository does **not** configure standalone unless Kokkos is already built and discoverable.

> 1. Clone `kokkos/kokkos` beside this repository (CI commonly uses `5.1.0`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Clone `kokkos/kokkos` beside this repository (CI commonly uses the latest release of Kokkos).
```

| Dependency | Source | Required? |
|-----------|--------|-----------|
| Kokkos 4.7.02+ | External clone/install (CI pins `5.1.0`) | Yes |
| Google Test | Vendored in `tpls/gtest` | For tests only |
| BLAS | System install | Optional — CPU dense linear algebra |
| LAPACK | System install | Optional — auto-enabled when BLAS is enabled |
| MKL | Intel oneAPI | Optional — Intel-optimized CPU math library |
| MAGMA | System install | Optional — GPU-accelerated dense linear algebra |
| cuBLAS | CUDA Toolkit | Optional — auto-enabled with CUDA-enabled Kokkos |
| cuSPARSE | CUDA Toolkit | Optional — auto-enabled with CUDA-enabled Kokkos |
| cuSOLVER | CUDA Toolkit | Optional — auto-enabled with CUDA-enabled Kokkos |
| rocBLAS | ROCm | Optional — AMD GPU (default OFF even with HIP Kokkos) |
| rocSPARSE | ROCm | Optional — AMD GPU (default OFF even with HIP Kokkos) |
| rocSOLVER | ROCm | Optional — AMD GPU (default OFF even with HIP Kokkos) |
| ARMPL | Arm Performance Libraries | Optional — Arm CPU |
| SuperLU | System install | Optional — sparse direct solver |
| CHOLMOD | SuiteSparse | Optional — sparse Cholesky solver |
| METIS | System install | Optional — graph partitioning |

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| ACCELERATE | System install | Optional - Apple-optimized math library |

```

- **Dependency vigilance**: Review new dependencies for known vulnerabilities before adding them. The `dependency-review.yml` workflow blocks PRs that introduce vulnerable dependencies.
- **Respect copyright**: All contributions must comply with the project's Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception license. Do not generate or commit copyrighted content from external sources without explicit permission.

## Naming Style Guidelines for Kokkos Kernels Development
- Public CMake options follow `KokkosKernels_<OPTION>` (camel-case prefix + uppercase option name), for example `KokkosKernels_ENABLE_TESTS`.
- Internal CMake regular variables are typically uppercase `KOKKOSKERNELS_*`.
- Public API headers are generally in `*/src` with `Kokkos*` naming; implementation details are commonly in `*/src/impl` or `*::Impl` and should not be treated as stable public API.
- Preserve existing component naming (`blas`, `lapack`, `graph`, `sparse`, `batched`, `common`, `ode`) in paths and docs updates.

> ## Repository structure
> 
> ```text
> kokkos-kernels/
> ├── sparse/        # Sparse kernels (4.7M, ~209 headers, ~15 src) - PRIMARY
> │   ├── src/       # Public interfaces + implementations
> │   └── unit_test/ # Sparse unit tests
> ├── batched/       # Batched kernels (3.3M, ~334 headers, ~22 src)
> │   ├── dense/     # Dense batched kernels
> │   ├── eti/       # Explicit template instantiation sources
> │   └── sparse/    # Sparse batched kernels
> ├── blas/          # BLAS kernels (3.6M, ~229 headers, ~10 src)
> │   ├── src/       # Public interfaces + implementations
> │   └── unit_test/ # BLAS unit tests
> ├── common/        # Shared utilities (612K, ~47 headers, ~11 src)
> │   ├── src/       # Common utilities and helpers
> │   └── unit_test/ # Common unit tests
> ├── graph/         # Graph kernels (788K, ~37 headers, ~7 src)
> │   ├── src/       # Graph interfaces + implementations
> │   └── unit_test/ # Graph unit tests
> ├── lapack/        # LAPACK kernels (652K, ~42 headers, ~10 src)
> │   ├── src/       # LAPACK interfaces + implementations
> │   └── unit_test/ # LAPACK unit tests
> ├── ode/           # ODE kernels (252K, ~15 headers, ~7 src)
> │   ├── src/       # ODE interfaces + implementations
> │   └── unit_test/ # ODE unit tests
> ├── perf_test/     # Performance tests/drivers (4.8M)
> ├── benchmarks/    # Benchmark drivers and scripts
> ├── test_common/   # Shared unit-test infrastructure
> ├── example/       # Usage examples and integration-style samples
> ├── docs/source/   # Sphinx docs sources
> ├── cmake/         # Build system modules and options
> ├── tpls/          # Third-party content and vendored support code
> ├── .github/workflows/ # CI: linux.yml, osx.yml, at2.yml, format.yml, docs.yml, codeql.yml
> ├── CMakeLists.txt # Root configuration (version/options/components)
> ├── BUILD.md       # Build/setup guide
> └── DEVELOPER.md   # Developer conventions and CMake option patterns

Reviewer: Cool but it weirdly omits almost all `eti`, `tpls` and `impl` directories?
It might have based itself on a build structure more than the source code structure?
But then we put everything in `include` in our install directory so...
Suggested below is the proper structure for the sparse subdirectories, it needs to be replicated for other directories.
```suggestion
kokkos-kernels/
├── sparse/        # Sparse kernels (4.7M, ~209 headers, ~15 src) - PRIMARY
|   ├── eti/       # Private details of the explicit instantiation layer
|   ├── impl/      # Private implementation details for the corresponding public interfaces
│   ├── src/       # Public interfaces
|   ├── tpls/      # Private details for Third Party Libraries integration
│   └── unit_test/ # Sparse unit tests
├── batched/       # Batched kernels (3.3M, ~334 headers, ~22 src)
│   ├── dense/     # Dense batched kernels
│   ├── eti/       # Explicit template instantiation sources
│   └── sparse/    # Sparse batched kernels
├── blas/          # BLAS kernels (3.6M, ~229 headers, ~10 src)
│   ├── src/       # Public interfaces + implementations
│   └── unit_test/ # BLAS unit tests
├── common/        # Shared utilities (612K, ~47 headers, ~11 src)
│   ├── src/       # Common utilities and helpers
│   └── unit_test/ # Common unit tests
├── graph/         # Graph kernels (788K, ~37 headers, ~7 src)
│   ├── src/       # Graph interfaces + implementations
│   └── unit_test/ # Graph unit tests
├── lapack/        # LAPACK kernels (652K, ~42 headers, ~10 src)
│   ├── src/       # LAPACK interfaces + implementations
│   └── unit_test/ # LAPACK unit tests
├── ode/           # ODE kernels (252K, ~15 headers, ~7 src)
│   ├── src/       # ODE interfaces + implementations
│   └── unit_test/ # ODE unit tests
├── perf_test/     # Performance tests/drivers (4.8M)
├── benchmarks/    # Benchmark drivers and scripts
├── test_common/   # Shared unit-test infrastructure
├── example/       # Usage examples and integration-style samples
├── docs/source/   # Sphinx docs sources
├── cmake/         # Build system modules and options
├── tpls/          # Third-party content and vendored support code
├── .github/workflows/ # CI: linux.yml, osx.yml, at2.yml, format.yml, docs.yml, codeql.yml
├── CMakeLists.txt # Root configuration (version/options/components)
├── BUILD.md       # Build/setup guide
└── DEVELOPER.md   # Developer conventions and CMake option patterns
```

# Match formatting checks used by CI
clang-format-16 -i <changed_file>.{cpp,hpp,h}
```

Practical CI behavior to remember:
- Linux/OSX/AT2 PR workflows ignore docs-only changes (`**/*.md`, `docs/**`, etc.).
- Linux/OSX/AT2 workflows pin Kokkos to `5.1.0`.

## Testing
### Test structure
- Correctness tests are primarily in `*/unit_test`.
- Performance and benchmark-style tests are in `perf_test`.
- Tests are enabled only when configuring with `-DKokkosKernels_ENABLE_TESTS=ON`.

### How to execute tests
From a configured build directory:
```bash
ctest --test-dir kokkos-kernels/build --output-on-failure --timeout 3600
```

Useful focused runs:
```bash
ctest --test-dir kokkos-kernels/build -R <regex> --output-on-failure
```

Docs/API checks (for docs-only or API-surface changes):
```bash
git fetch origin develop:refs/remotes/origin/develop
git diff --name-only origin/develop > modified_files.txt
python3 scripts/check_api_updates.py
python3 -m pip install --require-hashes -r docs/build_requirements.txt
make -C docs html
```

## Critical Rules
### NEVER
- Never assume Kokkos Kernels can build without first installing/configuring Kokkos.

> - Never treat `*/src/impl` or `*::Impl` symbols as stable public API contracts.

Reviewer: Wrong directory structure
```suggestion
- Never treat `*/impl` or `*::Impl` symbols as stable public API contracts.
```

- Never skip formatting for touched C/C++ source/header files when relevant (`clang-format-16` is the CI formatter).
- Never assume `main` is the primary integration branch; use `develop` for comparisons and most CI-aligned checks.

### ALWAYS
- Always mirror CI workflow options (`linux.yml`, `osx.yml`, reusable workflows) when reproducing issues locally.
- Always pass `-DKokkos_ROOT=<kokkos-install-prefix>` for standalone builds.
- Always run focused `ctest -R ...` first for touched areas, then broader test coverage as needed.
- Always run docs/API consistency checks when public headers or docs are changed.

## Errors encountered during onboarding and workarounds
1. **CMake configure error: missing Kokkos package**
   - Error: `Could not find a package configuration file provided by "Kokkos"`.
   - Workaround: clone/build/install `kokkos/kokkos` first and pass `-DKokkos_ROOT=<install-prefix>` when configuring Kokkos Kernels.
2. **No `CONTRIBUTING.md` found at repository root**

>    - Workaround: use `README.md`, `BUILD.md`, `DEVELOPER.md`, and `.github/workflows/*.yml` as authoritative contributor/build/test references.

Reviewer: The contributing guide is actually provided in our documentations: `docs/source/Contributing.rst`
